Your retention graph is probably losing
viewers in three predictable zones.
Altogether, they can look like one
unavoidable decline, but they're
actually three different problems, and
each one has a specific edit that you
can use to fix it. So, give me about 10
minutes, and I'll show you where each
drop happens, how to spot it in your own
graph, and the simple move that corrects
it. These are small, repeatable fixes
that you can use on every upload. One of
these things is actually the opposite of
what creators are generally told to do,
and it happens to be the one that's
costing you the most views. So, here's
the common advice. Hook hard in the
first 5 seconds. Never stop simulating.
Jump cut everything and your retention
graph still looks like a cliff. That
advice is half wrong. Editors for some
of the biggest channels on YouTube these
days aren't trying to hijack you
anymore. Now they invite you in. Keeping
retention doesn't mean more stimulation.
It's about making the right move in the
right spot. And you don't have to guess
where that spot is. Your audience will
just straight up tell you. This is your
retention graph. The only metric YouTube
really gives us that shows how people
feel second by second as they watch your
content. Every dip is a place where you
lost someone. And every spike is a
moment that's worth rewatching. And it's
the spikes that really tell you
something. For instance, where an
education channel and just take a look
at where ours climb. It's every time we
stop talking about the thing and
actually show it step by step. The
screen recordings, the walkthroughs, our
retention spikes whenever we deliver
value to you, the viewer. And that's the
name of the whole game. Give people
value and they'll stay. And that will
beat any jump cut anytime, any day.
[music] So, there are three specific
places where you will just bleed
viewers. We'll call these zones. And
I'll give you the edit that fixes each
one. Zone one is the first 30 seconds of
your video which represents the single
biggest drop in the entire video.
Usually the mistake is trying to win it
with force. Louder, faster, more. You
spike and then you crash because
honestly at that point in the video
there's nowhere to go but down. The fix
is starting your video with something
called a loop. And you can do this in a
number of ways. For example, a question.
You can open with a question in the
first few seconds of your video, even if
it's a weird one. And you can give
people just a piece of the answer early
on. That early answer will build viewers
trust and it shows them that you will
deliver on the promises that you made in
the title and the thumbnail. There's
actually countless ways you can open and
close a loop. Just take a look at one of
the masters of this technique, Ryan
Tran.
>> So, let's see if it's legit.
>> There's the loop opened. Will this $5
Tik Tok microphone actually sound any
good. Now, watch how fast he closes it.
>> I'm just going to plug this in. And you
should notice a difference in the audio.
Listen closely.
>> All right. What do we think? Do we think
this is pretty good audio?
>> Question asked. Question answered. just
a few seconds later. He doesn't draw
something out for the sake of getting
his watch time up. Because this kind of
fast payoff is exactly what can earn
your viewers trust and hold their
attention for the remainder of the
video. Your first frame can be a visual
hook. And before a word is even spoken,
a question is already being raised in
the viewer's mind. These days, YouTube
is very much an autoplaying platform.
So, if you can start to raise a
question, even if the viewer has their
sound off, the chances of them clicking
into the video to get an answer to that
question go up significantly. So, try
not opening with your face mid-sentence.
Instead, open your video with a shot of
something that makes them go, "Wait,
what is this?" Not me, of course. People
have that reaction to my face as it is.
Then add movement in the edit. And by
movement, I don't mean shake the camera
around and have millions of graphics fly
in. But even if the camera never moved,
you edit it to have the camera maybe
push in just a little bit, just a few
percentage points. A static shot says
nothing's happening, but a slow movement
in, a slow push means, ooh, something's
coming. and leave yourself one beat, a
single low note, and a breath of near
silence to make the viewer
subconsciously lean in. Not to fill
space, but to leave a gap that the
viewer wants to close. So, open with one
question, one slow push in, and one
[music] held beat. And then close one
small loop to earn the viewer's
attention. And that cliff I showed you
at the very start, I still haven't told
you the whole fix yet. That loop is
still open. Remember that move earlier
that I said was the opposite of what
creators normally get taught? Well, this
is zone two, the thing that trips up so
many creators. Everyone assumes people
leave when the video gets too weighed
down with details. So they cut it up
real tight to keep it snappy. But in
reality, that thinking is completely
backwards. People click on a video
because they want the substance. They
want to see a person actually do a
thing. If you trim too recklessly, you
may cut out the very thing someone was
hoping to gain from watching the video.
Where people are actually leaving is the
setup that you build in front of all of
the stuff that's in the video. So many
creators frontload context [music] and
caveats and background before they've
earned any of the viewers trust. So
before I show you, let me give you some
background. That's not wrong and we're
not getting rid of that, but we are
moving it. Get to the thing first. The
context can come in once people have
decided that yes, they are going to
stay. Have you ever seen a movie that
opens on some impossible moment and then
suddenly the frame goes black and it
cuts to 3 weeks earlier? That's
basically what we're doing here. We grab
attention first and then we peel back
the story second. And here's how you can
do that in your videos. For example, we
can start mid-action. Don't build to the
thing, but drop people in and explain
along the way. What you're literally
doing is what they came for, so lead
with that as much as you can. Of course,
starting mid-action doesn't work for all
videos. For some videos, a slow buildup
might actually be preferable. There's
infinite ways to open a video and grab
attention at the same time, but the
underlying rule doesn't change. People
will sit through whatever setup you've
created as long as they trust that the
payoff is coming. Starting mid-action is
just one way to do it. Another is to
promise something upfront that viewers
trust is going to pay off soon. Take
this video. Why Adobe is uh finished. It
doesn't drop the big bomb, the reveal up
front, but it promises that big bomb up
front. And along the way, the creator
opens and closes smaller loops. A shift
in company policy here, a lawsuit there.
Each loop pays off individually,
building towards the big promise. In
this case, the promise being, I'm going
to tell you what Adobe's done to earn
the title of this video. However you
hold that attention, the footage has to
stay alive. And here's two ways to do
that. You can use this editing trick to
give a talking section a bit more
momentum. The cut in and the cut back. A
cut in will jump you closer to a keyword
or phrase. It basically says, "Listen to
this." A cut back returns you to the
wide shot. Two simple cuts that give an
otherwise talking head video a bit more
momentum. This is one of the most
efficient moves in editing, and you'll
find yourself using it constantly. And
when you're explaining, cut to action.
Whatever it is they came to watch you
do, that's what should be on camera
during those stretches. You want to
avoid being a talking head that's just
kind of narrating a thing. In fact, many
of the top creators on YouTube are only
really in their own videos in that
capacity for like a third of the time.
But which thing do you build your video
around? Well, you don't have to guess.
You can actually open up Vid IQ and let
it show you. It can show you the topics
that your niche overindexes on right
now. Zone three is the middle. That hook
may have bought you 30, 60 seconds, but
after that point, people will slowly
start to drift off. Two things fix it.
The first is the loop tactic from
earlier, but now on a timer. Every 60 to
90 seconds, you open a new one. Here's
where it gets worse. But that's not even
the real problem. You do that before the
last loop even closes. This means you're
always one open question ahead of the
viewer. The second thing you can do is
keep the screen alive in between. And
this is where the traditional advice
kind of gets things wrong. It tells you
to never stop stimulating. So you're
always piling on more graphics and
effects until the video becomes
honestly, at least for me, exhausting to
watch. But that's not really the actual
goal. The goal should be that the video
doesn't feel lifeless. A static frame is
reason to leave, but honestly so is
wallto-wall noise. What you want is the
right move in the right spot. And here's
some examples of moves you can make and
when to make them. You don't need to
have moved the camera. Instead, animate
it during the edit. And two moves cover
most of it. I mentioned this earlier,
but you have scale where you can push in
slowly to build tension or you can pull
out to have a big reveal. Or you can pan
drifting across the shot so it doesn't
feel lifeless. Going nice and slow and
steady because moving too fast will feel
cheap. And if you have still images in
your video, you can animate those as
well. If you use a photo or a screenshot
in your video and it's just sitting
there, that's potentially just a dead
spot. the visual equivalent of dead air.
Key frame it so it scales maybe 15 to
20% during its entire duration on
screen. And now nothing in your video
feels static, but it also doesn't feel
frantic. As viewers, we do like to see
the video flow and have new things get
added to the screen. So rotate your
footage types between A-roll, B-roll,
and motion graphics. A change of what's
on the screen grabs the eye
automatically, so use that. A point that
drags on if you're just a talking head
on camera can land more dramatically if
you use a motion graphic. And you also
want to be thinking about your viewer's
ey lines during the edit. Instead of
showing everything flat, you can darken
or blur everything that is around your
subject. You can shift the hue, pan
towards a certain direction, make your
subject glow. You can be in control of
where your viewer wants to look at any
given time, and that keeps them from
drifting. And this last one is something
you may or may not have already noticed.
Yes, visuals do hold people's attention,
but you can also give those visuals on
screen a sound. Something slides in, it
gets a whoosh. Something gets
highlighted, it gets a tick. Sound is a
whole second sense that you get to use
to hold your viewers's attention. And
three sounds can be used to convey
emotion. Risers, hits, and drones. A
riser builds tension during a reveal. A
hit releases it, and a drone sits under
a darker, mysterious beat. Obviously,
only use these if something is actually
going to happen, otherwise it'll just
stop working. Music can also be a great
tool rather than just an afterthought.
You can match a mood to a section of the
video, and then you can change the track
if the topic changes. Or you could do my
favorite where you dramatically pause
the music when you're about to say the
big thing that you've been waiting to
say. But stuff like that, if you use it
just one time, it can change the entire
feeling and vibe of a moment in a video.
You can also give your viewers a break
by just holding it for a beat after you
land a big point. But what I'm saying is
that wall to wall stimulation is a great
way to lose people. Quick gut check,
though. Go back to your last video and
count how many of these you actually
did. Most creators do one or maybe two
of these, and that could be a good
reason why the middle of your video
tends to sag. And even if you implement
a lot of these changes today for your
next upload, you may still find that
your videos are struggling a little bit
when it comes to retention. I just want
to say that's okay. This is going to
take practice. This is the part of video
editing where your voice starts to shine
through beyond just the things you said
to your camera. But all right, here's a
quick recap. You have the cold open
cliff where you invite a viewer in with
a loop and a slow push in. The setup sag
where you start mid-action and lead with
what they came in for. And finally, the
midroll sag, where you reset the clock,
keep everything moving, and use sound to
increase your dynamics. Every move here
is about doing one thing, and that is
keeping people watching for as long as
possible. And if you string enough of
these together, there's a good chance
that when your video sags, there's
nowhere for people to drift off to. Of
course, some of the things I've said
here today might be a bit intimidating,
especially in the realm of motion
graphics. So, we have a video right
here. It's 2026. If you are intimidated
by some of these tactics, then you could
watch this because if you're looking for
a bit of a shortcut, we have you
covered.